How dental care works in Sweden
Så fungerar tandvården i Sverige - engelska

Dental care is often more expensive than other care. Compare dental care costs before choosing a dentist or dental hygienist. The amount you need to pay depends on factors such as your age and what treatments you need.

In Sweden, you pay a large part of the dental care costs yourself. So, always ask your dentist or dental hygienist how much an examination or treatment will cost. You have the right to know this before the services are provided.

If you come from another country or are an asylum seeker, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.

How do I seek dental care?

If you need help with your teeth, seek treatment at a dental clinic, which is staffed by dentists, dental hygienists and dental nurses. They can examine, treat and prevent problems with your teeth and gums. You can choose which clinic you want to visit.

You can find dental care here.
Free for children and young people

Children and young people can receive dental care free of charge. This applies until 31 December of the year of their 23rd birthday. Almost all examinations and treatments are covered.
Financial support for dental care

You will need to pay for dental care from the year of your 24th birthday.

You receive an allowance for dental care each year. The amount you receive depends on your age. This is called the general dental care allowance. When it is time to pay, let your dental clinic know that you want the allowance applied.
Special allowance if you have a disease

If you have a disease that affects your teeth, you can receive a special allowance for dental care. A dentist or dental hygienist will decide whether you are eligible for the special dental care allowance. You may need a doctor’s certificate stating what disease you have.
Limit for how much you have to pay

There is a limit for how much you have to pay for dental care over a twelve-month period. This is called high-cost protection for dental care.
Sometimes dental care is paid like medical care

There are some cases where you pay the same price for dental care as you would for medical care. One example of this is if you have a disease and need dental care as part of the treatment.

Such dental care is free of charge for people aged 85 and older.
Fixed price in some clinics

Some dental clinics offer an agreement that acts like insurance. This means that you pay the same amount every month. You pay this amount even when you do not visit the dentist that particular month. When you later need treatment, like getting a filling in a tooth, it is already paid for.

You can ask for help if you cannot afford dental treatment. Ask the dental clinic if they would split the bill into several invoices. You could also talk to your bank or contact Social Services in your municipality.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. There may sometimes be a charge for interpreter services.

Revision date:
2022-10-04
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Gunnar Henning, Dentist, Oral Health Unit, Folktandvården Västra Götaland, Göteborg

Dental care in Sweden if you come from another country
Tandvård om du kommer från ett annat land - engelska

You may be entitled to dental care on the same terms as those who have Swedish dental insurance. How much you will have to pay depends, among other things, on which country you are from.

If you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Emergency or planned dental care

Dental care can be emergency or planned. Emergency dental care is treatment that cannot wait until you return home. All other dental care is planned.

It is the dentist who decides whether the treatment you need is considered emergency dental care. One example is if you damage a tooth. It then depends on how much pain you are in and how long you plan to be in Sweden.
If you are from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK

The EEA includes Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein.
Emergency dental care

Present your EU card to receive emergency dental care.  You will then pay the same price as people insured in Sweden. You order an EU card in your home country. Children must also have an EU card.

If you do not have an EU card, there are two options:

    You can request a provisional certificate from your country’s equivalent of the Swedish Social Insurance Agency (Försäkringskassan). This is a temporary certificate that works in the same way as an EU card.
    You can pay the full cost and then apply to be reimbursed the money when you get home. Keep all the receipts from the dentist.

If you are insured in the UK, you will get a Health Insurance Card. This card gives you the same rights as an EU card.
Planned dental care in Sweden

You will need a certificate from your home country if you want planned dental care in Sweden. The certificate must state which dentist in Sweden will treat you and what treatment you will receive. You request the certificate from your country’s equivalent of the Swedish Social Insurance Agency.
Dental care if you come from a Nordic country

If you are from a Nordic country, you pay the same price for emergency dental care as people living in Sweden. This applies both if you are in Sweden on holiday or if you live here. You will need to show your passport or ID card and provide your home address.

The Nordic countries are:

    Denmark
    Finland
    Norway
    Faroe Islands
    Greenland
    Iceland
    Åland

Free emergency dental care for children and young people

If you are a child or young person from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK, you can receive emergency dental care in Sweden free of charge. This applies until 31 December of the year of your 23rd birthday. You will need to present your EU card.
Dental care for students

If you are from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK and are studying in Sweden, you need to present your EU card to receive emergency dental care. You will then pay the same price as people insured in Sweden.
Swedes from abroad visiting Sweden

If you are a Swedish citizen living outside an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK, you will have to pay the full cost of dental care in Sweden. This applies to both emergency and planned dental care.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. There may sometimes be a charge for interpreter services.

Revision date:
2022-10-04
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Victoria Kornedal, Operations Developer in International Care, Försäkringskassan, Stockholm

Dental care if you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden
Tandvård om du är asylsökande eller inte har tillstånd att vara i Sverige - engelska

If you are an adult asylum seeker in Sweden, you have a right to receive dental care that is deemed as urgent. This also applies if you are in Sweden without a permit. If you are under the age of 18, you always have the right to dental care.

Dental care is regarded as urgent if you need treatment to keep the problem from developing into an emergency. The dentist will decide whether the dental treatment you need is urgent.

If you come from another country and are seeking dental care in Sweden, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How do I seek dental care?

Seek treatment at a dental clinic if you or a member of your family has a toothache.
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. You must present the card when you seek dental care.

Children also receive an LMA card when they seek asylum.
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine. You will then get the same dental care as people seeking asylum.
Present your UT card when you seek dental care

You will receive a special card when you register with the Swedish Migration Agency. This is called a UT card. You must present the card when you seek dental care. This applies to both adults and children.
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you can receive emergency dental care, but will have to pay for it yourself.
How much does dental care cost?

For children under the age of 18, dental care is free of charge. Almost all examinations and treatments are covered.
Adults pay for dental care

If you are aged 18 or older, you pay a small fee for dental care that is deemed urgent.
Allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency

You can apply for an allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency for medical, dental and prescription medicine expenses. The allowance covers costs that exceed a set amount within a six-month period.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.

Revision date:
2022-10-06
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Information about dental care is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/tandvard-engelska/