Text blow is about This is 1177:

This is 1177
Det här är 1177 - engelska

You can call the 1177 helpline if you or someone in your family is ill. You can get advice from a nurse in English or Swedish. You can call any time of day. The website 1177.se provides information about health and illness.

Läs texten på svenska.

1177.se is the healthcare system’s dedicated website. It is also a telephone number.

You can read more about how healthcare works in Sweden in this text.
Call 1177 for advice on healthcare

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice when you are ill or injured.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. You can choose to speak Swedish or English. In some regions, you can also get help in other languages.

The nurse can give you advice on how to manage your condition. If necessary, they can tell you where to go for care.
For the whole family

You can also call if a child or relative is ill. There is no charge for using the 1177 hotline. You will only be charged for the cost of the call.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if your phone does not have a Swedish subscription or SIM card, or if you are calling from another country.
Your information is protected

You need to provide your personal identity number or coordination number when you call 1177.  This is needed so that the staff can make notes. The notes are saved.

Your personal details and what you tell us are protected by confidentiality and professional secrecy. This means that staff are not allowed to tell anyone outside of healthcare anything about you. This secrecy applies to all healthcare staff you meet, including interpreters and pharmacy staff.
Advice on health and healthcare online

The website 1177.se provides information about illnesses, care and health. It also gives advice on what you can do to make you or your child feel better.

All the information on 1177.se has been fact-checked by doctors and other healthcare professionals.
Finding care

You can search for and find addresses and telephone numbers for different healthcare clinics.

Choose the region you live in to get the right information. You can do this at the top of the page.
Log in with e-identification

You can also log in to 1177.se.  Then you can, for example, make an appointment or contact a healthcare clinic. To log in, you need an e-identification program and a Swedish personal identity number.
Share article


Revision date:
2022-03-24
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Martin Wohlin, Doctor and Medical Expert at 1177.se, Stockholm
Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/det-har-ar-1177/

Text above is about This is 1177

---------------------------------------------

Text below is about How to buy medicines in Sweden

How to buy medicines in Sweden
Så köper du läkemedel i Sverige - engelska

You can buy some common medicines yourself from places such as a pharmacy or shop. However, there are some medicines that require a prescription. For these, you need to first contact a healthcare provider.

It is important that you know how to take your medicines. If you have any questions about your medicines, contact a healthcare professional. You can also ask at a pharmacy. 

Läs texten på svenska här. 
Different types of medicines

There are different types of medicines. Some medicines, called over-the-counter medicines, can be bought without a prescription. Examples of these include medicines for a cough, sore throat, aches or fever. This is called self-care. The other type of medicine is part of a treatment. For such medicines, you need a prescription. 
When you are at the doctor’s

Before a doctor or other healthcare professional writes a prescription, you need to tell them what other medicines you are taking. This is important to make sure you get the right medicine at the right dose.  

You can read more in the text: How healthcare works in Sweden. 
Where do I buy medicines?

You can buy medicines in a pharmacy or a shop. 
Buying at a pharmacy 

At a pharmacy, you can buy both medicine for self-care and prescription medicine. Only pharmacies and their websites are allowed to sell prescription medicines.  

When you shop on a pharmacy website, the medicines are sent to your home or to the pharmacy. Some pharmacies can also deliver medicines to you. 

All pharmacy staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that the staff are not allowed to tell anyone else anything about you.  

You must be at least 18 years old to buy certain medicines from a pharmacy. 
Buying at a grocery store or petrol station 

You can buy many self-care medicines at a grocery store or petrol station.  

To buy medicines in a shop or at a petrol station, you must be at least 18 years old. 
If you have any questions

All pharmacies have trained staff. They can answer questions about medicines.  

You can also call Läkemedelsupplysningen (Medicines Information Line), which is open weekdays between 8:00 and 17:00. The phone number is 0771-46 70 10. They can speak both Swedish and English. 
How much do prescription medicines cost?

If you live in Sweden, you are covered by what is known as high-cost protection. You only pay up to a certain amount each year for your prescription medicines. Children under 18 years of age do not usually have to pay for prescription medicines. 

This also applies to children who are seeking asylum or who do not have a permit to be in Sweden. 

Adults who are seeking asylum or who do not have a permit to be in Sweden have to pay a small fee for prescription medicines. 
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. It applies to both adults and children. When you present the card, you can buy some prescription medicines at a lower price.  
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine.  
Present your UT card when you visit a pharmacy 

When you register with the Swedish Migration Agency, you will receive a special card. This is called a UT card. It applies to both adults and children. When you present the card, you can buy some prescription medicines at a lower price. 
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency 

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you have to pay the full price for medicines.  
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. When booking your healthcare appointment, let them know that you need an interpreter. 

Revision date:
2022-10-17
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, StockholmAnna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/sa-koper-du-lakemedel-i-sverige-engelska/

Text above is about How to buy medicines in Sweden

----------------------------------------------------

Text below is about How healthcare works in Sweden

Så fungerar vården i Sverige - engelska

If you or someone in your family needs medical care, you can usually get help at a healthcare centre (vårdcentral) . Call 1177 if you are unsure where to seek care. You can choose to speak Swedish or English. The nurse who answers the 1177 helpline can also give you advice on what you can do yourself to feel better.

Läs texten på svenska här.

Healthcare in Sweden is governed by different areas called regions. Choose a region at the top of the page to find out what applies where you live.

This text contains links to 1177.se , where you can search for healthcare clinics. The information is in Swedish. Ask someone who speaks Swedish for help if you need it. Read more about 1177 in this text.
There is a healthcare centre close to where you live

A healthcare centre is a clinic that is usually close to where you live. It may also be called a health centre (hälsocentral), a GP surgery (husläkarmottagning) or a doctor’s office (familjeläkarmottagning).

A healthcare centre is staffed by doctors, nurses, and other healthcare professionals. They can help if you or someone in your family is sick or depressed.
The healthcare centre is open on weekdays

The healthcare centre is always open during the day from Monday to Friday. Some healthcare centres may also be open at other times.

You usually need to make an appointment before you come.

You can search for a healthcare centre near you here. The page is in Swedish.
Urgent care centres during evenings and weekends

If you need to seek care when the healthcare centre is closed, you can turn to an urgent care centre. These are open evenings and weekends.

You can search for an urgent care centre here. The page is in Swedish.
An emergency department when you are seriously ill

If you are seriously injured or become very ill, seek care at an emergency department of a hospital. They are open 24 hours a day. You do not need to make an appointment beforehand.

In an emergency department, the sickest people get help first. This means that if you are not seriously ill, you may have to wait to receive care.
112 - Emergencies

Call 112 if the matter is very urgent, or if your or someone else’s life is in danger.

The person who answers can speak Swedish and English, but can get help from an interpreter if needed. An ambulance will be sent if you or someone who is ill needs urgent care at an emergency department.
Centres for children

There are special centres for children up to the age of six. These are called child health centres (barnavårdscentraler). A child may go there regularly, and will also receive their vaccinations there. You can search for a child health centre here. The page is in Swedish.

In some places, there are special hospitals and emergency departments for children.
Centres for young people

A youth guidance centre (ungdomsmottagning) is for young people between the ages of 13 and 25. There, you can get help with things like contraception, pregnancy tests, sexually transmitted diseases, counselling and advice.

Read more at youmo.se.

You can find a youth guidance centre here. The page is in Swedish.
Centres for women

There are special centres for women. These are called midwifery clinics (barnmorskemottagning), maternity centres (mödravårdscentral) or women’s clinics (kvinnohälsovård). At these centres, you can get advice, and help with contraception and testing for various diseases, for example. You can also come for check-ups if you are pregnant.

When you are due to give birth, you may go to a maternity ward. They are open 24 hours a day.

You can search for a midwifery clinic here. The page is in Swedish.
Other clinics

You may sometimes need care at another clinic, such as a dermatology clinic for your skin, a psychiatric clinic for mental health or an eye clinic for your eyes.

For such a visit, you may need what is known as a referral. A referral contains information about the examination or treatment you require. The healthcare professional you see at the healthcare centre can send the referral.

You may have to wait for some time for an appointment at one of these clinics.
Dental care centres

Dental care is often more expensive than other care. Ask about the cost before you visit. Children and young people usually get dental care for free.

You can find a dental care centre here. The page is in Swedish.
How much does healthcare cost?

The amount you pay when seeking healthcare in Sweden varies. For example, it costs more to seek care at an emergency department than at a healthcare centre.

The cost also varies depending on your age, and whether you live in Sweden or come from another country.

There is often no charge for children and young people.
Ask for an interpreter to get help in your language

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. The interpreter is sworn to secrecy. 

You will not have to pay for assistance by an interpreter. Contact your healthcare clinic before you go to get help in your language.
You have the right to feel safe when using healthcare services

All staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that staff are not allowed to tell anyone outside of healthcare anything about you. This secrecy applies to all healthcare staff you meet, including interpreters and pharmacy staff.

When you seek care, you need to say your name and who you are. If you have any documents that prove your identity, it is a good idea to take them with you.

The site youmo.se contains information on secrecy and confidentiality for young people. The text is available in several languages.

Revision date:
2022-03-24
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/sa-fungerar-varden-i-sverige/

Text above is about How healthcare works in Sweden

---------------------------------------------------

Text below is about Healthcare in Sweden if you come from another country

Vård i Sverige om du kommer från ett annat land - engelska

In Sweden, you always have the right to emergency care. This is true even if you come from another country and become ill while you are in Sweden. How much you will have to pay depends, among other things, on which country you are from. In some cases, you have to pay the full cost yourself.

If you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden, you can find more information here. 

Läs texten på svenska här.
You always have the right to emergency care

You always have the right to receive care in urgent situations. In other words, emergency care that you need urgently, such as if you get a serious infection or if you break a bone and need to be fitted with a plaster cast.  
Necessary care 

Another type of care is called necessary care. This includes care for conditions such as a chronic disease that you have your whole life.  

You have the right to necessary care if, for example, you are insured in a country that is part of the EU. Being insured in a country means that you are covered by that country's social insurance system.
How much does healthcare cost?

The cost of healthcare services depends on which country you are insured in. There are different rules for different countries.  
The Nordic countries 

If you are insured in a Nordic country, you pay the same amount for healthcare services as people insured in Sweden. The Nordic countries are:

    Denmark
    Finland
    Norway
    Faroe Islands
    Greenland
    Iceland.

You will need to show an ID card and provide your home address. 
European Health Insurance Card = EU card 

If you are insured in any of the following countries, you pay the same amount for healthcare services as people insured in Sweden:

    an EU country
    Liechtenstein
    Switzerland. 

You will need to show a European Health Insurance Card. This may also be called an EU card.  

You order the European Health Insurance Card, EHIC, from the country in which you are insured. Children must also have an EU card.
Apply for reimbursement of the money afterwards

You can also pay the full cost of the healthcare services yourself, and then apply for reimbursement of the money you have spent from your home country.
If you plan to seek medical treatment

When you travel to Sweden for planned treatment, different rules apply.  
If you come from a Nordic country 

If you are insured in a Nordic country, you need a special certificate. You will then pay the same fees as people insured in Sweden.  

You can apply for the certificate from your country's equivalent to the Swedish Social Insurance Agency (Försäkringskassan).  
Some people may need to apply for reimbursement of the money afterwards 

If you are insured in an EU country, Norway, Iceland or Liechtenstein, you can apply for planned treatment in Sweden. In such case, you will pay for the treatment at the time it is provided, but can then apply for reimbursement of the money from your home country.  

The rules for how much you can be reimbursed differ from country to country. 
If you come from a country outside of the EU, EEA or Switzerland

Most people who come from a country outside of the EU, EEA or Switzerland will have to pay the full cost themselves if they need healthcare services in Sweden. This applies to emergency, necessary, and planned care. The EEA includes Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein. 
Sweden has an agreement with some countries

Sweden has a special agreement with some countries regarding healthcare. Under this agreement, people from the countries in question pay the same amount for certain types of healthcare services as people insured in Sweden. This applies, for example, if you break a bone and need to be fitted with a plaster.

Countries with an agreement are:

    Australia
    Algeria
    Israel
    Turkey
    the state of Quebec in Canada. 

Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. 

Revision date:
2022-08-26
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Labeata Shala, verksamhetsutvecklare internationell vård, Swedish Social Insurance Agency, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/vard-i-sverige-om-du-kommer-fran-ett-annat-land---engelska/

Text above is about Healthcare in Sweden if you come from another country
----------------------------------------------------------

Text below is about: Care if you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden

Vård om du är asylsökande eller inte har tillstånd att vara i Sverige - engelska

If you are an adult asylum seeker, you have a right to receive medical and dental care that is deemed as urgent. This also applies if you are in Sweden without a permit. If you are under the age of 18, you always have the right to medical and dental care.
A nurse examining a patient
Regardless of nationality all adults are able to receive medical and dental care that is deemed as urgent.

Care that is deemed as urgent includes, for example, being fitted with a plaster cast if you break your leg.

How do I seek care?

If you or someone in your family needs medical care, you can usually get help at a healthcare centre (vårdcentral). It may also be called a health centre (hälsocentral), a GP surgery (husläkarmottagning) or a doctor’s office (familjeläkarmottagning).
If you are unsure where to seek care

You can always call 1177 if you are unsure where to seek care. You can choose to speak Swedish or English.

The nurse who answers the 1177 helpline can also give you advice on what you can do to make yourself feel better.

Read more about how healthcare works in Sweden.
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. You must present the card when you seek care.

Children also receive an LMA card when they seek asylum.
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine. You will then get the same medical and dental care as people seeking asylum.

You will also be offered a health check.
Present your UT card when you seek care

You will receive a special card when you register with the Swedish Migration Agency. This is called a UT card. You must present the card when you seek care. This applies to both children and adults.

Everyone over the age of 12 is offered free vaccination against COVID-19. 
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you can receive emergency care, but will have to pay for it yourself.
How much does healthcare cost?

There is no charge for healthcare for children up to the age of 18. This applies to both children seeking asylum and children who do not have a permit to be in Sweden. There may sometimes be a charge for children seeking care at an emergency department.
Adults pay for care

If you are aged 18 or older, you pay a fee for medical and dental care.
Examples of healthcare costs

    Visiting a doctor at a healthcare centre costs a maximum of SEK 50.
    Visiting a dentist costs SEK 50. This applies to dental care that is urgent.
    Prescription medicines cost a maximum of SEK 50. However, some medicines, such as cough medicines, cost the full price.

Examples of healthcare that is free of charge

    Visits to a midwifery clinic.
    Maternity care.
    Visits to a children's healthcare centre (BVC).

Free health check for adults and children

All adults and children seeking asylum in Sweden are offered a health check. This is free of charge.

If you are in Sweden without a permit, you will be offered a health check when you seek healthcare. You will not have to pay for this.
Ask for an interpreter to get help in your language

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. The interpreter is sworn to secrecy. You will not have to pay for assistance by an interpreter. Contact your healthcare clinic to arrange help in your language before your visit.

Revision date:
2022-04-05
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, StockholmAnna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Link:
https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/vard-om-du-ar-asylsokande/
