Giving birth through the vagina
Att föda barn genom slidan - engelska

Childbirth often starts with contractions or fluid coming out of the vagina. The contractions become longer and more frequent. The birth ends with you pushing the baby out through your vagina. Childbirth can take anywhere from a few hours to a few days.

Läs texten på svenska här.

Giving birth through the vagina is called a vaginal birth.

A movie about giving birth through the vagina.
The cervix has to open up
Gravid med foster i magen där livmodertappen pekas ut.
Förstora bilden
The cervix opens up.

The baby is inside the womb, which is also called the uterus. At the bottom of the uterus is the cervix, which has an opening down into the vagina.

The baby can be born when the cervix has softened and opened completely.
How childbirth begins

Most commonly, childbirth begins with contractions. Contractions are when the muscles of the uterus get tight and then relax to help push the baby out.

At first, the contractions usually feel like pain in the lower part of the abdomen. They may come a little now and then. Sometimes there is a longer break between the contractions. There may be more discharge than before.
Sometimes there is fluid or a little blood

Sometimes childbirth starts with fluid running out of the vagina.

Some births start with a little bleeding from the vagina.

Sometimes the contractions are strong right away. In such case, the cervix opens more quickly.
More contractions as the baby moves down towards the vagina

The contractions will eventually get stronger. They become longer and more regular.

It is common to have contractions for many hours. Sometimes for up to 24 hours.

The cervix opens completely.

The baby comes further down. As the baby approaches the opening of the vagina, it is common to feel sick and vomit.
It is good to change position

The birth may go faster if you change position. For example, you can walk, lie on your side, or kneel in the bed.

The midwife (barnmorska) can tell you when to change position.
Time to push

When the baby is at the opening of the vagina, it is time to push.

You push to help get the baby out through your vagina. You usually push when you are having a contraction.

Between contractions, you can usually rest.

When you have a contraction, you may feel the need to poo. Sometimes poo may even come out.
The midwife will help you

The midwife will help you and explain how and when to push.

It may burn and sting when the baby's head comes out through the vagina.

The opening of the vagina may be stretched if the head takes time to come through. There will then be less risk of tearing.
Sometimes vacuum extraction (sugklocka) is needed

Sometimes the birth needs to be assisted by applying a soft or rigid cup with a handle and a vacuum pump to the baby's head. This is called vacuum extraction. A doctor will then carefully guide the baby out while you push.

This method is most often needed when the contractions are too weak.
When the baby is born

You can have the baby resting on your chest straight away if you wish, and the baby seems fine.

It is good for the baby to have skin-to-skin contact.

In most cases, the baby will start crying at first.

Some babies need help from a midwife or paediatrician.
The uterus contracts

Once the baby is born, the uterus contracts.

The placenta detaches from the wall of the uterus, and you can push it out.

There will be a wound when the placenta detaches from the wall of the uterus. Blood will come from the wound, just like during a menstrual period. This bleeding is called discharge (avslag).
The midwife examines you

The midwife will examine your genital area to see if there are any tears.

You are usually given anaesthetic before the examination.

During childbirth, you will lose blood. Your body has prepared for this by producing about two litres of extra blood during your pregnancy.
You can get help from an interpreter

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-04-08
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping
Illustrator:
Petra Frid, illustrator, TT News Agency

When should I go to the maternity ward?
När ska jag åka till förlossningsavdelningen? - engelska

During the early stage of labour, it is most common to stay home. When the contractions become stronger and more frequent, it is time to go to the hospital maternity ward.

Läs texten på svenska här.

A maternity ward is a hospital ward for people who are giving birth.

All maternity wards are open 24 hours a day.
Call before you go

Call before you go to the maternity ward.

That way, they can be prepared for your arrival.

The midwife (barnmorska) you speak to will be able to give you advice. Sometimes it is better to stay at home for a while longer.
Where do I call?

You can find maternity wards throughout Sweden here. The information is in Swedish.

You can call the 1177 helpline if you are not sure which maternity ward to contact. The nurse answering the helpline can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.

If you go to a midwifery clinic, they will give you information on where to call.

The maternity ward of your choice may be full. In such case, you will have to go to another one.
When should I go to the maternity ward?

You may need to go to the maternity ward if any of the following apply:

    The contractions are regular and very painful. The contractions come 2–3 minutes apart.
    Each contraction lasts about one minute.
    You have given birth previously. In such case, labour may progress more quickly.
    You must travel a long way to get to the maternity ward.
    Amniotic fluid has come out of your vagina. This is especially true if the fluid smells bad, and is brown or brownish.
    There is blood coming out of your vagina.
    You have pain all the time.
    Your contractions are not severe, but have been going on for a long time. You may need medicine to help you rest and regain your strength.

When are you allowed to stay?

At the maternity ward, you will be seen by a midwife.

If your labour is well underway, you will be examined.

The midwife may, for example, examine inside your vagina to see how much your cervix has opened.

You may need to go home again if the midwife thinks it will be a while before the baby is born. This is common.
What can you do at home?

Here are some tips on what you can do at home:

    Rest and take it easy.
    Eat and drink to keep your energy levels up.
    Use medicine containing paracetamol if you are in pain.
    Use massage and heat if you are in pain. For example, you can take a hot shower.

To bring with you

You do not need to bring anything with you to the maternity ward. They have everything that you need there.

But many people pack a bag with a few of their belongings.

Here are some examples of what you can bring with you:

    clothes for you and the baby
    something good to eat
    toothbrush, hairbrush and other hygiene items.

Revision date:
2022-04-12
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Maternity ward – where you go when it is time to give birth
Förlossningsavdelningen - hit kommer du när du ska föda barn - engelska

When you are due to give birth, you can go to a maternity ward. There, you will be met by a midwife (barnmorska) and examined. You will be given your own room.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

A maternity ward is a hospital ward for people who are giving birth.

You can go there when you are due to give birth.

You can bring along your partner or another close person in your life.

Read more about how to contact the maternity ward.
Who works there?

The maternity ward is staffed with midwives. They are specialists in childbirth.

The midwife usually works together with someone else. This may be an assistant nurse or another midwife.

Doctors who specialise in childbirth also work in the ward. They assist when needed.
What happens when you arrive at the maternity ward?

You will first meet with a midwife.

They will ask you how you are feeling.

The midwife will determine whether your labour is well underway.

If so, you will stay at the maternity ward.

If your labour is not far enough along, the midwife may ask you to go home and come back later.
You will be given your own room

Your room will have a special bed.

It will also usually have comfortable furniture to sit on.

Usually, the room will be equipped with nitrous oxide, which is also called laughing gas. You can use this when you are in pain.

There is often a shower or bathtub in the ward.
You will talk about your birth

The midwife will ask questions about what you want the birth process to be like.

For example, you will talk about what body position you want to be in while giving birth.
The midwife will check how your baby is doing

The midwife will feel and press on your stomach. They do this to examine how the baby is positioned in the womb. The midwife will also feel inside your vagina to check whether your cervix has opened. The cervix needs to be soft and open for the baby to be able to come out.
Undersökning av gravid mage.
CTG will be used to measure your baby’s heart rate.
Two transducers will be placed on your stomach

The midwife will measure your baby’s heart rate with a monitoring device called a CTG.
This is a good way to find out how your baby is doing.

The device is connected to two transducers that the midwife attaches to your stomach.

These are held in place with a belt.

The device also measures when the uterus tightens during a contraction.

Taking this measurement will not affect the baby.
When the baby is born

You may stay in hospital for a while after the baby is born.

How long you stay depends on how you and the baby are feeling.

It is more common to leave hospital early if you have had a baby before.

In such case, you will come in for a visit after a few days.
Sometimes you and the baby will go to a BB ward

If you need to stay for a while after giving birth, you will be transferred to another type of maternity ward.

This is called the BB ward.

There, you can get help for the first few days after giving birth.

For example, you can get help with breastfeeding.

The BB ward is staffed with midwives, assistant nurses and doctors.
If others want to come and visit or stay overnight

Sometimes your partner or the person who was with you at the birth can stay with you.

Relatives and siblings of the baby are usually allowed to visit.
The baby will be examined before you go home

The baby will be examined by a paediatrician before you and the baby go home.
You can get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-05-04
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping
Photographer:
Jenny Hallström, 1177.se, National Editorial Team

Inducing labour
Igångsättning av förlossningen - engelska

Sometimes help from a healthcare service is needed to get the childbirth process started. This is called inducing labour. There are different methods that can be used to induce labour. These are described here.

Läs texten på svenska här.

You cannot do anything yourself to induce labour.
Why is labour induced?

Labour may be induced for a number of reasons. The most common reason is that the baby is overdue, meaning that the pregnancy is beyond 41 weeks. Another reason may be that the person carrying the baby has some illness, such as pre-eclampsia.
Consultation with a doctor

Before labour is induced, you will have a consultation with a doctor. You will be given information about the birth process, and can ask questions.
What happens when you arrive at the hospital

At the maternity ward, you will first meet a midwife.

The midwife will check how your baby is doing in the womb.

The midwife or doctor will examine you and check how your cervix feels. The cervix is the lower part of the uterus that extends down into the vagina. It must soften and start to open before labour can be induced.

Then labour is induced.
Different methods for inducing labour

There are a number of methods that can be used to induce labour.

For example, you may be given medicine. Another method is for a midwife to puncture the amniotic sac, causing the amniotic fluid to run out. Some people call this "breaking your waters".

The different methods can cause your contractions to start. The cervix must soften and open up. The baby may then come down into the pelvis.
How long does it take?

The time it takes to induce labour varies. In some cases, it may take two to three days before the actual birth starts. During this time, most people have to stay in hospital.

Once labour has started, the baby is usually born within 24 hours. The birth process follows the same phases as if it had started on its own.

The birth process will not necessarily be more complicated because labour was induced. But it often takes longer.
The need for vacuum extraction or caesarean section is more common

It is more common for delivery to turn into an assisted birth by means of vacuum extraction, which involves applying a soft or rigid cup with a handle and a vacuum pump to the baby's head. A doctor will then use this to carefully guide the baby out.

The need to deliver by caesarean section (C-section) is also more common. This is usually because the contractions are not strong enough.
If you need to talk to someone

You may have concerns and questions both before and after childbirth.

Talk to a midwife for help.
You can get help from an interpreter

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-04-20
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Birthing positions
Ställningar att föda i - engelska

There are different positions that can help you when giving birth. It may feel good to change position from time to time to avoid getting too tired. This also makes it easier for the baby to move down towards the vagina and come out.

Different positions are more helpful at different stages.

The maternity ward staff will usually suggest different positions as the birth progresses. They will help you, and explain what you need to do.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Standing
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda ståendes, med sin partner bakom sig.
Standing with a special walking frame.

You can stand and lean on a loved one, the bed or other furniture.

The maternity ward also has special walking frames you can use while standing.

Stand with your legs spread wide apart and your knees slightly bent. Try to rock back and forth from hip to hip occasionally.

Try to keep as much of your weight off your feet when standing with support. This allows the muscles in your pelvis to relax.
On all fours
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda på alla fyra, med sin partner bredvid sig.
On all fours.

The all fours position (also known as the hands and knees position) allows you to rest your back somewhat.

This can give you more power when pushing the baby out.

It may feel good to move your hips.
Squatting
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda på huk, med sin partner bakom sig.
Squatting.

You can squat leaning forward or with support behind you.

Squatting can make your pelvis open up a lot.

This position can sometimes make the baby come out quickly, which may cause tearing. It is therefore important that you listen to the midwife when they tell you what you need to do.
Sitting in a birthing stool
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda på pall, med sin partner bakom sig.
Sitting in a birthing stool.

A birthing stool is shaped like a semi-circle. You sit down on it while positioning your bottom at a low angle.

You can relax your thigh muscles and buttocks.

You can also have a loved one support you from behind.

When you sit on a birthing stool, your pelvis opens up a lot.
Kneeling
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda på knä, med sin partner bredvid sig.
Kneeling.

The head end of the beds at the maternity ward can usually be raised and lowered.

You can kneel in the bed and rest against the raised end of the bed.

It may feel nice to position a beanbag between your stomach and the bed for extra support. A beanbag is a large cushion that is easily shaped.
Semi-seated
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda sittandes, med sin partner bredvid sig.
Semi-seated.

In a semi-seated position, you have support for your back. The support can come from the bed, a loved one, or a beanbag.

Try to pull your knees towards your chest so your pelvis can open up. This makes it easier for the baby to move downwards towards the vagina.
Lying on your side
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda på sidan, med sin partner bakom sig.
Lying on your side.

Lying on your side can help to slow down the pace, such as when pushing the baby out.

Lying on your side can also be good when you need to rest.

A support can be used if it becomes difficult to hold up your uppermost leg.
Semi-recumbent with your legs supported
Gravid kvinna i ställning för att föda i gynläge, med sin partner bredvid sig.
Semi-recumbent with your legs supported.

In this position, you lie on your back with your legs resting in leg supports.

When you lie in this way, your pelvis opens up.

This position is often used if the midwife or doctor needs to be able to see when the child is coming out.

Revision date:
2022-08-02
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping
Photographer:
Anna-Karin Axelsson

Bleeding after giving birth
Blödningar efter förlossningen - engelska

Everyone bleeds from the vagina after childbirth. The blood comes from a wound in the uterus. The wound occurs when the placenta detaches from the uterus. Some people who experience problems with bleeding may need to seek medical attention.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

The blood that comes after childbirth may be called discharge (avslag).
Typical bleeding after childbirth

The first few days after giving birth, the bleeding is similar to that of a heavy period.

More blood may come when you are active and moving around.

More blood may come when you have been lying still and then get up. There may also be clots of blood.
You will bleed less and less

The bleeding will decrease over time. After a while, the blood will become more brown in colour. Gradually, it will become lighter brown.

The bleeding will stop after about six to eight weeks.
Self-help tips

Here are some tips during this period of bleeding:

    Take a shower instead of a bath.
    Do not use period products that are inserted into the vagina, like tampons or menstrual cups.
    Use a condom if you have vaginal intercourse.

When and where should I seek medical care?

Most people do not need medical care for bleeding after childbirth.

Seek medical care if any of the following applies to you:

    You are bleeding more than you did the first day after giving birth.
    You have large clots or many clots of blood.
    The amount of blood saturates a regular sanitary towel within an hour.

Seek medical care at the maternity ward where you gave birth.

If they cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse.
The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Why is there blood?

When you are pregnant, a placenta forms and attaches to the uterus. When the baby is born, the placenta detaches from the uterus, creating a wound.

After childbirth, the uterus contracts and gets smaller. The wound also gets smaller and heals.
Some people need treatment

If you bleed a lot, it may be because your uterus is not contracting properly. There may also be pieces of placenta left inside the uterus.

In such case, you may need treatment with medicine.

Revision date:
2022-04-08
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Vaginal tears in childbirth
Bristningar vid förlossningar - andra språk - engelska

Vaginal tears are common in childbirth. Some tears are more severe and require stitches. Tears can be small or large. The tears are immediately taken care of after childbirth by a midwife (barnmorska) or doctor.

The midwife will tell you whether you have a vaginal tear that requires stitches.

You can ask to see an illustration of the vagina, where the midwife can point out where the tear is located.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How it feels

Here are some common issues when you have vaginal tears:

    Vaginal pain.
    Bleeding from the vagina.
    The stitches chafe.
    Trouble peeing or pooing.

These issues usually get better and better as each day passes. The worst of the pain usually goes away after a week. But it can take up to a year to fully recover.
Treatment

If the vaginal tears require stitches, this will be done immediately after birth.

The stitches will dissolve or fall away on their own within a few weeks.
Return visit to the midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagningen)

Within 12 weeks of giving birth, you will have a return visit to the midwifery clinic. At this visit, you can talk to the midwife about your vaginal tears.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Some people cannot wait until it is time for the return visit to the midwifery clinic to seek help for their vaginal tears. They need to seek care before the return visit.

Some do not discover their vaginal tears until later. In such cases, it is fine to seek care after the return visit.

Contact your healthcare provider if any of the following applies to you:

    Your symptoms are getting worse instead of better.
    The vaginal tear is affecting your life and how you are feeling.
    It hurts when you have to poo or pee.
    You are having problems with the stitches in your vagina.

If it is the weekend, you can wait until it is a weekday.

You may need to seek medical care more urgently if any of the following applies to you:

    The wounds in your vagina become more swollen and start to hurt.
    You get a fever or feel sick.
    You are having trouble peeing.

Where to seek care

Contact one of these clinics:

    The maternity ward where you gave birth.
    An urgent care centre.
    A midwifery clinic.
    A gynaecology clinic (gynekologisk mottagning).
    A healthcare centre.

If they are closed or cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline for advice on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse.

The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Seek care more than once if necessary

Seek medical care again if you do not feel like you are getting better from the treatment you are receiving.

Help is often available, even if a long time has passed since you had your baby.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.  Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Self-help tips

Self-help tips as your vaginal tears heal:

    Take it easy and rest.
    Use painkillers if you are in pain. Lie down while breastfeeding if it hurts to sit.
    Move around. For example, you can go for walks.
    Take a shower instead of a bath. Do not use soap in your vagina. Pat yourself gently with a towel when drying off.
    Go around without tight clothes and underwear sometimes, if possible. It helps to allow air to reach your vagina.
    Train the muscles of your vagina. Such exercises are called pelvic floor exercises or Kegel exercises.
    Wait to have intercourse until your vagina feels completely healed. This can take weeks or months.

You can take over-the-counter medicine if you have pain. You can ask about this at a pharmacy.

Revision date:
2022-06-13
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Eva Uustal, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Uterine infection after childbirth
Infektion i livmodern efter förlossning - engelska

Some people develop an infection in their uterus after giving birth. This is because bacteria have got into the uterus. Seek medical attention so you can get treatment.

Läs texten på svenska här.

With treatment, most people recover after a few days. A uterine infection that has been treated will not prevent you from becoming pregnant again.
Symptoms

You may have one or more of the following symptoms:

    You have pain in your abdomen. It hurts if you press your stomach.
    There is a very bad smell of blood and fluid coming from your vagina after childbirth. This blood and fluid is called discharge (avslag).
    You have a fever higher than 38°C.

You may also get a headache and feel tired.

It is most common to get an infection between 1 and 10 days after giving birth.
When and where should I seek treatment?

If you think you have a uterine infection, seek medical attention immediately.

Contact the maternity ward, or BB, at the hospital where you gave birth.

If they cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Examination and treatment

At the hospital, you will be examined in various ways. For example, they may perform tests on your blood and urine.

If you have an infection, you may need to be treated with antibiotics. You may also need other medicines.

Some people may need to be treated in hospital. In such case, your baby can usually come with you.
Self-help tips

Rest and take it easy.

You can use medicines with paracetamol if you have stomach pain or a high fever.

Take a shower instead of a bath. Do not use soap or lotion in your vagina.
What causes uterine infection?

The infection is caused by bacteria getting into the uterus.

It is more common to get an infection if, for example, the birth took a long time. It is also more common if the placenta did not detach on its own. But not everyone who has had a childbirth experience like this gets an infection.
Get help from an interpreter

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-04-12
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Leaving hospital and the initial time period after childbirth
Att lämna sjukhuset och första tiden efter en förlossning - engelska

The length of stay in hospital after giving birth varies. It depends on the amount of care and help you and your baby need. Even if you have gone home with your baby, you can contact the hospital if you need to.

Läs texten på svenska här.
You can go home at the earliest after six hours

How long you stay in hospital depends on how you and the baby are feeling. It also depends on how much support you and your baby need.

You always need to stay in hospital at least six hours after the baby is born to give the healthcare staff time to make sure that you and your baby are doing well.

Some people need to stay for a few days.
If you go home early

It is more common to leave hospital early if you have had a baby before.

You may need to come back for examinations if you have gone home early.
Before you leave the hospital

Before you leave the hospital, the staff will find out how your baby is feeding. This could be how breastfeeding is going or how formula feeding is going.

The staff are there to provide help and support if you need it.
The baby will be examined before you go home

The baby will be examined by a paediatrician before you go home.
Contact the BVC after you have been allowed to go home

Contact a children's health centre, BVC, after you have been allowed to go home.

At the BVC, you can ask any question you may have about babies, such as how to look after a baby and what it is like to be a parent. The nurse at the BVC will examine your baby to make sure they are healthy and developing as expected.

You can find a list of children’s health centres here. The information is in Swedish.
Examinations after you have been allowed to go home

After you have been allowed to go home, the baby will be examined at the BVC.
You will have an examination

Everyone who has given birth is given an appointment for a postnatal visit to a midwife. At the visit, the area in and around your vagina will be examined.

Some people may also need to be examined earlier, for example if they experienced tearing or other injuries during childbirth.
You can get help with feeding your baby

You can get help with feeding your baby at the hospital where you gave birth, at the BVC or at a midwifery clinic. They can help you with breastfeeding or bottle feeding.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact your healthcare provider if any of the following applies to you:

    Your baby is sick.
    You are experiencing problems after giving birth.
    You are worried about your baby’s health.

Seeking care during the first seven days after childbirth

If you or the baby need care within the first seven days of childbirth, do not hesitate to ask for help.

Contact the maternity ward or hospital where the baby was born. They are open 24 hours a day.
Seeking care after seven days

You can contact any of the following if you or your baby need care:

    A children’s health centre, BVC, for the baby.
    A midwifery clinic, for you.
    A healthcare centre.
    An out-of-hours service.

If you need urgent care

Seek care at an emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

You can call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.

Revision date:
2022-09-02
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Prolapse after giving birth
Framfall efter att du har fött barn - engelska

During a prolapse, something is bulging out through the opening of the vagina. This could be the uterus or the inside of the vagina (birth canal). It may feel uncomfortable, but there is treatment that can help.

Prolapse may be caused by the opening of the vagina becoming larger after pregnancy.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How it may feel

These are examples of symptoms:

    There is a feeling of heaviness or pain in your pelvic area.
    You may develop chafing on the part that is bulging out.
    You may have difficulty peeing. You may also feel an urge to pee more frequently, or pee yourself.
    You may find it difficult to poo. You may also need to pass wind more frequently or have a problem with poo leaking out.

The symptoms you have will depend on which organ is causing the bulge in your vagina. The symptoms will lessen when you lie down.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare provider if you think you have a prolapse.
If it is the weekend, you can wait until it is a weekday.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.  Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
If urgent care is needed

You may need medical attention more urgently if the following applies:

    You are having a lot of trouble peeing, or cannot pee at all.

Contact one of these clinics:

    The maternity ward where you gave birth.
    An urgent care centre.
    A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning).
    A gynaecology clinic.
    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).

If they are closed or cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse.
The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Self-help tips

Here are some tips that can ease the symptoms or reduce the risk of a prolapse:

    Train the muscles of your vagina. Such exercises are called pelvic floor exercises or Kegel exercises.
    Avoid heavy lifting.

Here are tips that can make it easier to poo:

    Eat foods high in fibre and drink plenty of fluids. This will make your poo softer and easier to get out.
    Go to the toilet immediately when you feel a need to poo.
    Put a stool under your feet when you sit on the toilet. This will make it easier for your bowels to get the poo out.
    It may help to hold your finger against your vagina while trying to poo.

Here is a tip that can make it easier to pee:

    After you pee, you can stand up and lean forward. Then sit down and try to pee again.

Examinations

The doctor will perform a gynaecological examination and an ultrasound scan. The doctor may also examine your rectum by inserting a gloved finger.

You will also be asked to provide a urine sample.

Some people may need additional examinations or give other samples.
Treatment

You may be given a special plastic ring to put in your vagina. The ring is used to prevent the bulging. A midwife will help you to insert the ring into your vagina.

You may undergo surgery if your symptoms are more severe.
Pregnancy

It is possible to get pregnant and carry a baby in your womb even if you have a prolapse. Talk to a doctor or midwife (barnmorska) if you are planning to become pregnant.
Having sex

It is not harmful to have intercourse if you have a prolapse.

Revision date:
2022-06-29
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Eva Uustal, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Visit to the midwifery clinic after you have given birth
Besök på barnmorskemottagningen efter du har fött barn - engelska

After you have given birth, it is important to visit the midwife at the midwifery clinic. At the appointment, you will discuss how the birth went and how things have been afterwards. You will also undergo a physical examination and be given the opportunity to ask questions.

The visit is intended to let the midwife know how you are feeling and whether your body is healing properly.

Attending the visit is voluntary.

You can bring along your baby if you like.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How the visit is scheduled varies

How the visit is scheduled varies. In some regions, the midwife will call you to make an appointment. In other regions, you have to call to make the appointment.
When does the visit to the midwifery clinic take place?

The visit takes place within 16 weeks of the birth. You decide when it is convenient for you to go. If you wish, you can go after a few weeks.

You can go for one or two visits. You can even have additional visits if you wish.

During these visits, it is common to see the same midwife as you saw during your pregnancy. However, you can see a different midwife if you wish.
What happens at the visit?

You can ask any questions you may have.

You will talk about topics such as:

    How you are feeling both physically and emotionally.
    Your childbirth experience and how you felt things went. You will read the medical record of the birth, which states what care you received and the birth process you experienced.
    Breastfeeding and feeding the baby.
    How you feel about being a parent.
    What it is like to have another child, if your baby already has siblings.
    Sex and contraception.
    Relationships.

Different measurements

At the visit, the midwife will usually measure your blood pressure and take a blood sample. You will also be weighed.
Examination in and around your vagina

The midwife will examine the area in and around your vagina. You will be asked to lie on your back in a special chair that has leg supports. Your legs will be apart and you will be completely undressed in the lower part of your body.

Examples of what the midwife will examine include:

    Whether you have tearing in your vagina after giving birth.
    How the muscles in and around your vagina and rectum are working.

If you had a caesarean section

The midwife will examine the wound visually and by touch.
If you need support

The midwife will help to arrange a doctor’s appointment, if necessary.

In some cases, you may need care from another healthcare provider, such as a physiotherapist or a psychologist.
The midwife will help you to make an appointment.
Get help from an interpreter

If you do not speak Swedish, you can get help from an interpreter during your healthcare visits. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.

Revision date:
2022-09-02
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Your feelings about your childbirth experience
Hur du upplevde din förlossning - engelska

It is common to feel many emotions after giving birth. That is why it can be helpful to talk about your childbirth experience with a midwife or doctor. You can get more support if you need it.

Feelings about the childbirth experience vary from person to person.

The same is true about the need and desire to talk about the birth.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Talk to a midwife or doctor at the hospital

After giving birth, you can talk to a midwife or doctor while still at the hospital. You can ask questions and have them answered.

Your partner or someone else close to you can be present for this.
Sometimes the midwife will ask questions

After some births, the midwife will usually ask how the person is feeling, both physically and emotionally.

For example, this may be if the baby was born by an unplanned caesarean section. Another example is if the baby needed extra care after birth.

If you need to talk, let a member of staff know, if they have not asked you already.
After you come home

A few weeks after you come home, you will visit a midwifery clinic to meet with a midwife.

At that time, you will talk about your childbirth experience and how you are feeling.

You and the midwife will read and discuss your medical records from the birth. These records are the notes that the staff made about the time you spent in hospital.
If you need more support and help

You can receive support and help if you are not doing well physically or emotionally after the birth.

The midwife will help you if you need to see a doctor. You can also get help to see another type of healthcare provider, such as a psychologist or physiotherapist.

The first week after the birth, you can contact the hospital where you gave birth.

After a week, you can contact a midwifery clinic. You can find a list of midwifery clinics here. The information is in Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-09-02
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

This information about Childbirth is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/forlossning/