THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT HIV:

HIV is a virus that can spread between people and cause infection. If you have the virus, you may develop a condition called AIDS. There is treatment for HIV and AIDS.

If you have HIV but are receiving HIV treatment, you will not infect others.

HIV is an abbreviation for human immunodeficiency virus.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Symptoms

HIV is most commonly asymptomatic, meaning that there are no symptoms.
Symptoms that may appear early on

Some symptoms may appear two to three weeks after a person becomes infected.

Here are some examples of such symptoms:

    fever
    sore throat
    swollen and tender lymph nodes.

Symptoms that may appear later

It can sometimes take years before symptoms appear in an infected person.

Here are some examples of such symptoms:

    fatigue
    night sweats
    shingles.

When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare centre (vårdcentral), a dermatology clinic or a sexual health clinic if you suspect you may have contracted HIV.

If you are aged 25 or younger, you can usually contact a youth guidance centre (ungdomsmottagning).

Testing for HIV is always free at all clinics.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
If urgent care is needed

If you are certain that you have been exposed to infection, contact the infectious disease clinic of a hospital immediately. You should do this, for example, if the condom broke while you were having sex with someone who has HIV but is not being treated for it.

Contact an out-of-hours service or an emergency department if the infectious disease clinic is closed.
How can I reduce my risk of getting HIV and AIDS?

Here is how you can protect yourself from HIV infection: 

    Use a condom when having vaginal sex, anal sex or oral sex with someone who has a penis.
    Put a condom on sex toys you put in your mouth, vagina or anus if you use them with someone else.
    Do not share needles with anyone else. 

How HIV is transmitted

You can get HIV through blood, semen or vaginal secretions.

How children can be infected

A child can get HIV in different ways:

    The child gets HIV from their mother during pregnancy.
    The child gets HIV during childbirth.
    The child gets HIV through breast milk.

The risk is very low if the mother is using anti-HIV medicines. 

How is HIV not transmitted?

You will not get HIV by having sex with someone who has HIV but is receiving treatment for it.

You cannot get HIV by hugging or kissing someone.

HIV is also not spread by using the same towel or coffee mug as someone else. 
Learning you have HIV

Learning you have HIV may be difficult to come to terms with. It may therefore be a good idea to bring a loved one along with you to the first few visits.
Treatment

There is no way to get rid of HIV completely. But there are medicines that reduce the amount of virus in your body. The treatment also prevents you from developing AIDS.

Children with HIV

All children with HIV in Sweden are treated with medicine.

Children with HIV can do the same things as other children, such as go to school and play.
Communicable Diseases Act

According to the Communicable Diseases Act, you are required to tell the person you are having sex with that you have HIV. This is called the duty to inform. Your doctor may waive your duty to inform if treatment is working well.
Share article

Revision date:
2022-06-16
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Pernilla Albinsson, Nurse, HIV Clinic/Infectious Disease Clinic 2, Karolinska University Hospital and SMSH (Stockholm Sexual Health Clinic), Stockholm

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/hiv-och-aids---andra-sprak-engelska/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT HIV

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT MEASLES:

Measles is a disease caused by a virus. Some people become seriously ill. The disease is rare in Sweden because the measles vaccine is included in the vaccination programme for children.

Symtoms
Rash
You develop a rash on your body.

When you have measles, it is common to have these symptoms: 

    You have a cough.
    Your eyes are irritated, red and sensitive to light.
    You have a high fever. 

You develop a rash 

After a few days, you develop a rash. The rash usually appears on the face first and then spreads to the rest of the body. The rash may look different on different skin types. 

On fair skin, the rash will be bright red at first, and then darken after a few days. On dark skin, the rash tends to be darker from the start. The rash may sometimes be hard to see. 
You may be ill for a long time 

It is common to have a fever and feel ill for five to six days after developing the rash. It then usually takes another week before you feel better. It may take much longer if you develop a complication. 
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare provider if you think you or someone close to you has measles.

You can contact one of these clinics: 

    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).
    A paediatric clinic (barnläkarmottagning).   

Call before you go 

Measles is highly contagious.  

Call first if you intend to go to a clinic. Then the staff can see you without putting others at risk.
Get help from an interpreter 

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.  

Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. 
Call 1177 for advice 

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.  

Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number. 
Complications

It is normal to develop complications when you have measles. Possible complications include ear infections,  sinus infections and pneumonia. 

Measles can also lead to serious inflammation of the brain, but this is rare. 
How is measles transmitted?

Measles is very easily transmitted when a sick person coughs or sneezes. Small droplets containing the virus are then spread through the air. The virus can spread to several rooms or even an entire section of a building.

You can get infected if you have not had measles and have not been vaccinated. After infection, it takes about two weeks before you become ill. At most, you will be infectious for five days after the rash appears. 

You cannot be infected again if you have had measles once. 
Treatment

There is no treatment for measles. Medicines that lower the fever may make you feel a little better.

It usually feels good to rest in a cool, dark room. It is generally good to avoid bright lights, as they could irritate your eyes. 

Some people may need hospital treatment.   
You can get vaccinated against measles

There is a vaccine against measles. Ask about it at a healthcare centre.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Lars Rombo,  Doctor, Specialist in Infectious Diseases, Infectious Disease Clinic, Mälarsjukhuset, Eskilstuna

Retrived from:
https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/massling---engelska/


THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT MEASLES

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS - TB

Tuberculosis – TB

Tuberculosis is a disease of the lungs. The disease causes coughing for several weeks. Most people recover completely with treatment.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
What are some signs that you may have tuberculosis in your lungs?

When you have tuberculosis in your lungs, it is common to cough up phlegm. You are usually sick for more than three weeks.  

You may also have these symptoms: 

    You feel weak. 
    You feel tired. 
    You have a fever. 
    You sweat at night. 

Some children become seriously ill 

Children up to school age can become seriously ill from tuberculosis. They get a fever and feel weak. 

Children between the ages of about six and twelve usually do not get very sick. They rarely have a cough. Their symptoms are often a fever for several weeks, and feeling tired and out of sorts.  

From adolescence onwards, children can get as sick as adults, but often recover quickly with treatment. 
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare provider if you think your child has tuberculosis. You should also contact a healthcare provider if your child is under six years of age and has been in contact with someone with TB. You should do this even if your child is not sick.  

You can contact one of these clinics:  

    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).  
    A paediatric clinic (barnläkarmottagning).   

Call for advice 

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment. 

Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium that can be spread between people. When someone with tuberculosis in their lungs sneezes, coughs or spits, the bacteria can get into the air. When you breathe in that air, you can become infected. 

It may take a long time before you get sick. 

Tuberculosis is most often spread to people who have close contact with someone who has infectious TB. The bacteria are spread mainly within the family and others with whom the sick person lives. Children get sick more easily than adults, but do not infect others. Children up to school age are usually not infectious. 
Treatment

There is good treatment for tuberculosis. 

You will be treated with one or more medicines. It takes a long time to treat tuberculosis, often several months. 
You can be vaccinated against tuberculosis

Revision date:
2022-05-13
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Lars-Olof Larsson, Physician, Specialist in Pulmonary Diseases, Capital Region of Denmark 

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/tuberkulos-tbc-engelska/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS - TB

-------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT Gastroenteritis

Gastroenteritis

Gastroenteritis is very common and usually passes quickly. You may feel nauseated, vomit and have diarrhoea. If you have gastroenteritis, it is important that you drink more than usual.

This text deals with gastroenteritis in both children and adults.

Symptoms

If you have gastroenteritis, you may experience any of the following:

    You feel nauseated.
    You are vomiting.
    You have diarrhoea.
    You have stomach pain.
    You have a fever.
    Your body hurts.

Self-help tips

Drink more than usual. Try to drink frequently, a little at a time.

A young child may need to drink from a spoon. You can try ice lollies if the child does not want to drink.

Here are some more tips for gastroenteritis:

    If a young child is sick, let them nurse or give them formula more often than usual.
    Use rehydration tablets or sachets. This is a good idea if you are vomiting or have diarrhoea. 
    Once the gastroenteritis has passed, you can go back to eating normal food. Start with small portions.
    There are medicines that can stop the diarrhoea temporarily. These can be used by adults.

When and where should I seek treatment?

Most people who get gastroenteritis do not need medical care. The symptoms usually go away on their own.

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.


You need to contact a vårdcentral (healthcare centre) for urgent care if any of the following applies:

    A child less than six months old is vomiting and has diarrhoea.
    The person with gastroenteritis is not taking in any fluids at all.
    The person with gastroenteritis has blood in their vomit or faeces.
    The person with gastroenteritis has a high fever and chills.
    The person with gastroenteritis has a lot of stomach pain. It hurts even after the person has vomited or had diarrhoea. 

Some vårdcentral are open evenings and weekends.

What causes gastroenteritis?

Gastroenteritis is caused by a virus or bacteria. Winter vomiting disease (norovirus) is a common form of gastroenteritis. It is caused by a virus.

A virus can be transmitted if you are in close contact with a person who is ill. It can also be transmitted through food and drink that contains the bacteria or virus.
How to reduce your risk of getting gastroenteritis

Here are some ways you can reduce the risk of you or others gettinggastroenteritis:

    Wash your hands often and thoroughly. Use liquid soap.
    Keep the toilet clean.
    Keep the changing table or any other place you change nappies clean.
    Keep things clean when cooking. Use different knives and cutting boards for meat and vegetables.
    Eat food that has been properly cooked.
    Avoid cooking for other people when you have gastroenteritis.

Treatment

Most people do not need treatment. Some people who have difficulty taking in fluids may need hospital care.

If the gastroenteritis is caused by bacteria, you may need treatment with antibiotics.

Revision date:
2021-11-26
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Jonas Hedlund, Doctor, Specialist in Infectious Diseases, Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset, Solna, Solna

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/magsjuka/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT Gastroenteritis

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT RSV in children

RSV in children

RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) infections are very common. Most children who get it will have cold-like symptoms. Some children may become very ill and need hospital care.

RSV is most common in autumn and winter.

Symptoms

An RSV infection may seem like a common cold. However, children less than six months old can become very ill. It often takes several weeks for the child to recover.

These are usually the first symptoms of RSV:

    The child has the sniffles and a stuffy nose.
    The child has a fever.
    The child has difficulty nursing, eating or drinking. The child becomes tired easily.

During the first few days, some children become very ill. They may have difficulty breathing. This can be seen in the following ways:

    The child is breathing quickly.
    The child’s stomach moves in and out when they are breathing.
    The child seems to be struggling to breathe.

Some children may have pauses in their breathing. In such cases, the child stops breathing altogether for short periods.
Severe cough

RSV can cause a severe cough. It may start a few days after the first symptoms appear. The child may cough a lot for several weeks.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Most people with RSV do not need medical care. The illness usually goes away on its own.

Contact a vårdcentral (healthcare centre) immediately if any of the following applies:

    The child is less than 3 months old and has a fever.
    The child is having difficulty breathing.
    The child cannot nurse, drink or eat.

If your child has pauses in their breathing, call 112 immediately.

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

How can I help my child at home?

Here is how you can help a child who is ill:

    Give your child nasal spray or nose drops with saline. This will help if your child has a stuffy nose.
    Use a special suction bulb to remove mucus from their nose. These are available pharmacies.
    Raise your child’s head higher than the rest of their body when they sleep. You can do this with using extra pillows.
    Give your child fluids often. For example, you can nurse or give formula more often than usual.
    Feed your child more often than usual if they cannot eat very much at a time.
    Give your child fever-reducing medicine if they are feeling very poorly due to fever. Ask your pharmacist which one to use. Talk to a doctor first if your child is less than six months old.

How is RSV transmitted?

RSV is usually transmitted when a person with the illness sneezes or coughs. Small droplets with the virus are formed. You can get infected if you get these droplets in your body. 

RSV can also be transmitted when you touch a person who has the virus on them, for example by holding their hand. The virus can then get in your mouth or nose if you touch your face with your hands.
You can reduce your risk of RSV

Here is how you can reduce the risk of getting RSV:

    Wash your hands often.
    Keep your distance from other people, especially when indoors.
    Avoid contact with people who have a cold.
    Choose activities with others where you meet outdoors.

Some children become seriously ill

The risk of becoming seriously ill from RSV is greater if any of the following are true:

    The child is less than three months old.
    The child is less than one year old and was born more than five weeks prematurely.
    The child has a disease of the heart, lungs or nervous system, for example.

It is particularly important to protect children at risk of becoming seriously ill.
Treatment

A child who becomes very ill may need hospital care. At the hospital, the child will be given fluids and nourishment.

If the child is having difficulty breathing, they will be given help with this.
Medicine to prevent the virus

There is a medicine that prevents the virus from making a child very ill. It is given by a healthcare professional. A child who is at risk of becoming seriously ill from RSV may need this medicine.

Revision date:
2021-11-25
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Joachim Luthander, Paediatrician, Astrid Lindgren Children’s Hospital, Solna, Solna

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/rs-virus-hos-barn/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT RSV in children

-------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT Fever in children

Fever in children

Having a fever means that your body temperature is higher than usual. It is the body’s way of defending itself against infection. Children often get a fever.

It is common to get a fever when, for example, you have a cold, cough or sore throat. Fever is common in children, especially young children.

A fever is considered to be a body temperature of 38°C or higher.

Fever is usually not serious. However, it can be serious if the fever is high.
What symptoms does a feverish child have?

The child will show one or more of the following symptoms:

    The child’s body is warm.
    The child is tired.
    The child seems unhappy and irritable.
    The child is sleeping more, or less, than usual.
    The child is not eating or drinking as usual.

The child may become very cold and shiver as their body temperature rises. They may also break out in a sweat.
You can take your child’s temperature with a thermometer

Use a thermometer that measures body temperature.

The most accurate result is obtained by taking the child’s temperature in the ear or rectum. Use the rectal method if the child is younger than one.

Let the child rest for half an hour before taking their temperature.

You can purchase a thermometer at the pharmacy. Ask the staff for advice.
How to take the temperature in the ear

Use a thermometer that measures body temperature in the ear.

Cover the thermometer probe without touching the probe. Gently pull the ear up and back. Insert the thermometer straight into the ear.

Press the button and wait until the thermometer beeps. Now you can see your child’s temperature.
How to take the temperature in the rectum

Put some ointment, baby oil or cooking oil on the thermometer.

Insert the thermometer into the rectum.

    For children younger than six months: only insert the tip of the thermometer.
    For children older than six months: insert 1–2 cm of the thermometer.

It is important that the child is lying still when you take their temperature, otherwise it may cause pain.

Clean the thermometer afterwards.

Here you can see an instructional video on how to take the temperature in the ear.
What you can do to help your child

    Encourage the child to be calm. However, it is not necessary that they lie down all the time.
    Keep the child company.
    Make sure that the child drinks more than usual.
    Give the child food and drink that they enjoy. It is okay if the child eats less than usual for a few days.
    Remove the child’s clothing or blankets if they get too warm. Open the window.
    Put more clothing on the child or cover them with a blanket if they start to get cold.

When and where should I seek medical care?

Fever is a common condition and most people do not need to seek medical care when they have a fever.

Contact a healthcare clinic if your child’s fever lasts for more than four days.

A healthcare clinic can also be referred to as, for example, a GP surgery, a family doctor practice, or a healthcare centre.
When urgent medical care is required

You should contact a healthcare clinic immediately if any of the following apply:

    The child has a temperature of 41°C or higher.
    The child has a fever and seems very ill.
    The child is younger than six months and has a fever.
    The child has visited a tropical country, and now has a fever along with a headache or body pain.

Some healthcare clinics are open during evenings and weekends.

Seek care at the emergency department if the healthcare centre is closed or unable to receive you.
Finding a healthcare clinic

Revision date:
2023-09-04
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Inge Axelsson, Paediatrician, Professor Emeritus of Medical Science, Paediatric Clinic, Östersund Hospital 

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/feber-hos-barn--engelska/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT Fever in children

-------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT Head lice

Head lice

Does it feel itchy on your scalp, which is the skin close to your hair? It could be due to lice. Lice are only spread through direct hair-to-hair contact. If you have lice, you should treat it as soon as possible. You do this yourself at home.

What are lice?

Lice eggs may be visible in the hair.

A head louse is 2–3 millimetres long.


Head lice, sometimes just called lice, are small creatures that live in the hair, close to the scalp. They are small and therefore hard to see. Lice do not usually have a colour, but they may be grey, brown, black or red.

Lice suck blood and lay eggs that are small, round and white. Lice thrive where it is warm, such as in hair that is over 3 centimetres long.
How are lice spread?

Lice are spread between people by one person's hair coming into direct contact with another person's hair. It does not matter if you are clean or dirty. Anyone with hair on their head can get lice.

Lice cannot fly or jump, so there is no need to wash items like bedding, towels or toys. Lice can, however, be spread from hair through combs and brushes. So, these need to be cleaned.
How do I know if I have lice?

You can tell that you have lice because your hair will be itchy. It usually itches the most around your neck and on the sides of your head. If you look closely, you may be able to see the lice eggs.

You can also check your pillow. You might see a black powder there if you have lice.
Comb your hair with a lice comb

Comb your hair over a sheet of white paper.

The easiest way to check for head lice is to comb your hair with a lice comb. You can buy a lice comb at any pharmacy.

Follow these steps:

    Sit down at a table.
    Place a sheet of white paper in front of you.
    Carefully comb all of your hair over the paper.
    Check the paper to see if there are any lice.

Follow these steps when using a lice comb on someone else’s hair

It is usually easier to comb someone else's hair than to comb your own.

1. Starting from the back, comb the hair to the sides.

How do I get rid of lice?

You can get rid of lice by treating your head lice at home. Start by combing with a lice comb. Then treat your hair and scalp with a lice treatment product, which is available from any pharmacy. Repeat the treatment after seven days.

A lice treatment product can be used on anyone over the age of two. Please contact a healthcare centre before treating a child who is younger than two.

Everyone who lives in the same house must be treated at the same time. Avoid hair-to-hair contact until everyone’s hair has been treated for the second and final time. Otherwise, there is a risk that the lice will spread again.
If you have trouble combing your hair

If you have very curly or thick hair, it may be hard to run a comb all the way through it. In such cases, you can start off by putting conditioner in your hair and then combing a small area at a time using a regular comb or brush. After this, you can use the lice comb.
How do I avoid getting lice again?

Keep combing your hair thoroughly for two weeks after the treatment. Comb your hair at least twice a week.

Lice are most commonly spread during the summer. It is therefore important to use a lice comb and treat children who have live head lice before the autumn semester starts.

Even if you get rid of the lice, you can get lice again. If you learn that there is a case of lice at your children's preschool or school, comb both your own hair and your children's hair with a lice comb immediately. The earlier you find the lice, the easier it is to get rid of them.

Revision date:
2020-09-29
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg
Illustrator:
Lotta Persson, illustrator, Gothenburg
Photographer:
Kim Søholt Larsen Sjukhusfotografen på Skaraborgs sjukhus 

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/loss-i-haret--andra-sprak/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT Head lice

-------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT Bitten by a tick

Bitten by a tick

Ticks are small insects that bite into the skin and suck blood. Remove any ticks that you find on your skin. Ticks can sometimes spread diseases. If you are bitten, you may need to seek medical care.

What are ticks?

A tick is 1–4 millimetres long.

Ticks are small insects that are found in nature between March and October. High grass is one example of where you might find ticks.

Ticks suck blood from people and animals. A tick looks like a small spider and is 1–4 millimetres long. A tick may grow bigger in size once it has sucked blood.
Ticks can spread diseases

Ticks are not dangerous, but they can spread diseases. One of these diseases is TBE, tick-borne encephalitis, which can cause inflammation, swelling, of the brain. Another disease is called Lyme disease, and this can affect the skin, joints, and nerves. You can get vaccinated against TBE, but not against Lyme disease.

There is a greater risk of infection if the tick stays attached to the skin for a long time. You should therefore remove the tick as quickly as possible.
How do I remove a tick?

    Use tweezers to remove ticks. Pharmacies offer different kinds that you can buy.
    Grasp the tick as close to the skin as possible. Gently pull it straight out. Try to get all of the tick out.
    Wash the area where the tick was attached with soap and water.

If any parts of the tick remain, you can try to remove them. Otherwise, they usually disappear on their own. The skin may get a little red and swollen around the bite for a few days, but then heal.
When should I seek medical care?
A rash on the skin
A red rash, which may look like a circle, could be Lyme disease.

Most people who are bitten by a tick do not need medical care.

Contact a healthcare centre if a week has passed and any of the following has happened:

    There is a red spot in the area where the tick was attached, and this spot is larger than a couple of centimetres. The spot can be completely red or look like a ring, and it may be lighter in the centre.
    You have a fever, headaches, aches in your body, and you are more tired than usual.

Some clinics are open in the evenings and on weekends.

Call the 1177 hotline if you would like advice about what to do. The hotline is staffed by nurses. They can help you with information on where to seek care, if necessary.
Tips for not getting bitten by a tick

    Wear a long-sleeved shirt, long trousers, and high shoes or boots whenever you are out in nature.
    Check your body for ticks after you have been out in nature.
    Check your skin when you get undressed or shower/take a bath.
    Check your children's skin after they have been out in nature.

Also check your dogs, cats or any other pets. Remove ticks as soon as possible.
Vaccination against TBE

There is a particular risk of ticks spreading the disease TBE in certain areas, such as:

    Uppland
    Stockholm County, near the sea
    Södermanland
    Västra Götaland County.

There are also other areas where the risk of infection is greater. Call the 1177 hotline if you are not sure about whether there is a greater risk in your area.

Get vaccinated if you plan to be out in nature in an area where there is a greater risk of infection.

You need to get vaccinated two months beforehand in order to be completely protected against TBE. Contact a healthcare centre or clinic to get vaccinated.

Revision date:
2020-03-20
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg

Retrived from:

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT Bitten by a tick

-------------------------------------------------------------------------